Update stats inclusion to use proxy config instead (#8325)
istio/istio.io: content/en/docs/ops/configuration/telemetry/envoy-stats/index.md

$ kubectl exec $POD -c istio-proxy -- pilot-agent request GET stats
{{< /text >}}

> Envoy collects various kinds of statistics. The following links are Envoy documents about some stats that it collects:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Envoy generates statistics about its behavior, scoping the statistics by function, including:
```

- [Upstream connection](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/configuration/upstream/cluster_manager/cluster_stats)
- [Listener](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/configuration/listeners/stats)
- [HTTP Connection Manager](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/configuration/http/http_conn_man/stats)
- [TCP proxy](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/configuration/listeners/network_filters/tcp_proxy_filter#statistics)
- [Router](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/configuration/http/http_filters/router_filter.html?highlight=vhost#statistics)

> By default, Istio configures Envoy to record minimal statistics. The default collection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, Istio configures Envoy to record a minimal set of statistics to reduce the overall CPU and memory footprint of installed proxies. The default collection
```

keys are:

- `cluster_manager`
- `listener_manager`
- `server`
- `cluster.xds-grpc`
- `wasm`

To see the Envoy settings for statistics data collection use
[`istioctl proxy-config bootstrap`](/docs/reference/commands/istioctl/#istioctl-proxy-config-bootstrap) and follow the
[deep dive into Envoy configuration](/docs/ops/diagnostic-tools/proxy-cmd/#deep-dive-into-envoy-configuration).
Envoy only collects statistical data on items matching the `inclusion_list` within
the `stats_matcher` JSON element.

{{< tip >}}

> Note Envoy stats name highly depends on how Envoy configuration is composed, and thus could tie to Istio control plane implementation detail.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: The names of Envoy statistics can vary based on the composition of Envoy configuration. As a result, the exposed names of statistics for Envoys managed by Istio are subject to the configuration behavior of Istio.
```

> If you are building dashboard or alert based on Envoy stats, before upgrading your Istio, it is highly recommended to examine the stats in a canary environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you build or maintain dashboards or alerts based on Envoy statistics, it is **strongly recommended** to examine the statistics in a canary environment **before upgrading Istio**. 
```

{{< /tip >}}

> To configure Istio proxy to record additional statistics, you can add [`ProxyConfig.ProxyStatsMatcher`](/docs/reference/config/istio.mesh.v1alpha1/#ProxyStatsMatcher) to your mesh config. For example, to enable stats for circuit breaker, retry, and upstream connections globally, you can specify stats matcher as follow:

Reviewer: does this require pod restarts, etc?  What can the user expect if they manage to update?

Author: Added a note about this. Thanks!

- [TCP proxy](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/configuration/listeners/network_filters/tcp_proxy_filter#statistics)
- [Router](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/configuration/http/http_filters/router_filter.html?highlight=vhost#statistics)

By default, Istio configures Envoy to record a minimal set of statistics to reduce the overall CPU and memory footprint of the installed proxies. The default collection
keys are:

- `cluster_manager`
- `listener_manager`
- `server`
- `cluster.xds-grpc`
- `wasm`

To see the Envoy settings for statistics data collection use
[`istioctl proxy-config bootstrap`](/docs/reference/commands/istioctl/#istioctl-proxy-config-bootstrap) and follow the
[deep dive into Envoy configuration](/docs/ops/diagnostic-tools/proxy-cmd/#deep-dive-into-envoy-configuration).
Envoy only collects statistical data on items matching the `inclusion_list` within
the `stats_matcher` JSON element.

{{< tip >}}
Note: The names of Envoy statistics can vary based on the composition of Envoy configuration. As a result, the exposed names of statistics for Envoys managed by Istio are subject to the configuration behavior of Istio.

> If you build or maintain dashboards or alerts based on Envoy statistics, it is **strongly recommended** to examine the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you build or maintain dashboards or alerts based on Envoy statistics, it is **strongly recommended** that you examine the
```

statistics in a canary environment **before upgrading Istio**.
{{< /tip >}}

To configure Istio proxy to record additional statistics, you can add [`ProxyConfig.ProxyStatsMatcher`](/docs/reference/config/istio.mesh.v1alpha1/#ProxyStatsMatcher) to your mesh config. For example, to enable stats for circuit breaker, retry, and upstream connections globally, you can specify stats matcher as follow:

{{< tip >}}

> Proxy needs to restart to pick up the stats matcher configuration.

Reviewer 2: do users need to manually restart? if yes i would specify

Author: I am not sure what is categorized as `manual restarted`. Any restart of pod will pick up the configuration. This is just to set up expectation to the user that this won't take effect at runtime.

{{< /tip >}}

{{< text yaml >}}
proxyStatsMatcher:
  inclusionRegexps:
    - ".*circuit_breakers.*"
  inclusionPrefixes:
    - "upstream_rq_retry"
    - "upstream_cx"
{{< /text >}}

> You can also override the global stats matching configuration at per proxy by using `proxy.istio.io/config` annotation. For example, to configure the same stats generation inclusion as above, you can add the annotation to a gateway proxy or a workload as follow:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can also override the global stats matching configuration per proxy by using the `proxy.istio.io/config` annotation. For example, to configure the same stats generation inclusion as above, you can add the annotation to a gateway proxy or a workload as follow:
```

{{< text yaml >}}
proxy.istio.io/config: |-
  proxyStatsMatcher:
    inclusionRegexps:
    - ".*circuit_breakers.*"
    inclusionPrefixes:
    - "upstream_rq_retry"
    - "upstream_cx"
{{< /text >}}

{{< tip >}}

> Note if you are using `sidecar.istio.io/statsInclusionPrefixes`, `sidecar.istio.io/statsInclusionRegexps`, and `sidecar.istio.io/statsInclusionSuffixes`, please consider switching to `ProxyConfig` based configuration as it provides global default and uniform way to override at gateway and sidecar proxy.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note: If you are using `sidecar.istio.io/statsInclusionPrefixes`, `sidecar.istio.io/statsInclusionRegexps`, and `sidecar.istio.io/statsInclusionSuffixes`, consider switching to the `ProxyConfig`-based configuration as it provides a global default and a uniform way to override at the gateway and sidecar proxy.
```
